# Research journal

"We're optimistic. We think Virtual Reality (VR) is going great. It's going in a way that's consistent with our expectations, that said, we're also pretty comfortable with the idea that it will turn out to be a complete failure." -Gabe Newell, CEO of Valve

# Future proofing VR.
Whether its looking at what type of controller is best in VR (1), What evaluation method is best for it(2), how to display User Interfaces(UI)(3), How your body adapts to it(4), what should the definitions of real and virtual be as they become indistinguishable(5) and what should be done to make using VR safer(6) you are thinking of the future of VR and where it may go. What new and exciting things can be done in VR and what old things have to be rethought to make them work in VR. The technology is still in its infancy and everyone who is contributing to it is laying out the groundwork for what developers and designers and researchers of the future will be doing without thinking about it in the future. Nowadays if you are making an First Person Shooter you do not even think of the control scheme obviously its WASD to move Space to jump Mouse to look and shoot but it wasn't like that back when the first FPS came out (7) and that is where we are at with VR right now the concrete has not set and everyone is leaving footsteps for future developers to follow.  
The thing is because there is no "right way to do it" its going to take a lot of trial and error to get there by doing research you start exploring what feels better in VR (1), What makes sense more sense in UI(3), but then you need to think about how you are conducting the research, the old ways need to be re-purposed(2) is it even valuable information for future developers to read the current research if the terms used are not well defined(5). And with VR comes a whole new dimension of how the human body adapts to it psychologically, things that have never been though about are now possible (4), but there is no basis for VR, no rules (6). It is the wild west of research and we the consumers are the guinea pigs. The technology for VR at this level of immersion has not existed for long and it is already in the hands of consumers around the globe.  
Will people in the future be looking back at VR and saying "Wow, I can't believe we let people do that" knowing that there is some long term lasting effect VR use does to the body. We can not anticipate what is around the next corner for VR all we can do is prepare for the unexpected and go from there. Will VR even be the dominant Head Mounted Display (HMD) with things like Microsoft Hololense with their Artificial Reality(AR) headset avoiding the pitfalls of VR motion sickness. Maybe people will prefer the virtual world being brought to them instead of the other way around. But in the end it is going to come down to content as Gabe Newell states, "I can't point to a single piece of content that would cause millions of people to justify changing their home computing." Right now VR is just more accessible for developers your not really changing much to the workflow of developing in VR as you still need to build the world, its just the way the user interacts in your world that needs to be changed. But with AR technology you need to both think about the user interaction with your world, but also your worlds interaction with their space.  
VR and AR seem to be taking two different approaches to how they break into the market. VR companies like HTC VIVE and Oculus Rift are focused on getting their HMD's to consumers by setting the price to around 600 to 800 dollars and mainly focusing on entertainment, with games, virtual video/theater(9)(10). While the leader in AR right now Microsoft, is focusing on enterprise(11), by making partnerships with companies like Ford (12). And these are two examples of the companies thinking of the future of their tech where they see it going and how to help it get there. You can't be out of touch with what you are selling, because what you say it is and what you say it can do is what is going to drive developers to your platform. Similar to how researchers and early adopters of VR are setting guidelines of how to develop for VR, the makers of these platforms set the guidelines of what will be done on these platforms.  
With all that where do I think the current technologies stand, where are they going and will they get there? VR is currently an immersive experience, you enter a world that has been built for you and it has set rules you have to follow for example twisting your wrist will move your "third arm"(4). You will see a lot of Simulators come from VR like Birdly by SOMNIACS(13), because with VR you are losing your current senses and gaining new ones. I see this as becoming another barrier to entry for VR, because to achieve complete immersion you have to have great tracking, and if you do not have that your users will encounter motion sickness(1), but to achieve that you might need another piece of tech and this could just keep piling up unless some sort of new innovation is going to happen within VR. I feel like even though VR has a running start AR is going to over take VR. Because there are currently two companies advancing AR in two directions simultaneously with Microsoft taking on the enterprise market and Apple focusing on the consumer side of AR by releasing their latest phones with greater AR tracking(14). And the major difference between VR on the phone and AR on the phone is you do not need anything extra with your phone to get into this, the camera is already ready to go, while for VR you need a headset and lenses to enable VR for your phone. The beauty of AR is that you do not get the negative drawbacks of VR, mostly loss of senses and motion sickness, and that is why I believe it will be an easier adoption for the industry and consumers.  
In conclusion VR/AR is still growing and it doesn't have the same limitations of consoles where there needs to be an update of hardware every couple of years. It is just a completely new way to consume content, and if you think of it like a screen it can't really go out of date sure the experience might be lessened by it being in at a lower resolution or lower frame rate. The market is still in its infancy and it is going to be on us the developers to decide where we take this technology.

1. Hardware Interfaces for VR Applications: 
Evaluation on Prototypes  
2. Exploitation of Heuristics for Virtual Environments  
3. Investigating the Balance between Virtuality and Reality in
Mobile Mixed Reality UI Design – User Perception of an
Augmented City  
4. Homuncular Flexibility in Virtual Reality  
5. (Re-)Examination of Multimodal Augmented Reality  
6. Real Virtuality: A Code of Ethical Conduct. Recommendations for Good Scientific Practice and the Consumers of VR-Technology  
7. (How WASD became the standard PC control scheme) http://www.pcgamer.com/how-wasd-became-the-standard-pc-control-scheme/  
8. (Gabe Newell isn't really here - He's someplace else  
)https://www.polygon.com/features/2017/2/15/14616192/gabe-newell-interview-vr
9. Oculus Experiences (https://www.oculus.com/experiences/rift/)  
10. VIVE Port (https://www.viveport.com/?hl=uk&_ga=2.228706463.280322733.1510581358-1145872454.1510581358)  
11. HoloLens is Microsoft's 5-year plan to conquer augmented reality computing, dev kits due next year https://www.windowscentral.com/hololens-microsofts-5-year-plan-conquer-augmented-reality  
12. FORD'S USING AUGMENTED REALITY TO DESIGN BETTER CARS https://www.wired.com/story/ford-design-microsoft-hololens/  
13. Birdly http://www.somniacs.co/  
14. Apple shows off breathtaking new augmented reality demos on iPhone 8 https://www.theverge.com/2017/9/12/16272904/apple-arkit-demo-iphone-augmented-reality-iphone-8  
